# The Benefits of Ubiquitous Computing

---

| Question   | Answer |
| ---------- | ------ |
| Writer     | Pooja Sahu - MCA 1st year|
| Editor     | Shivpujan yadav|
| Status     | Edited |
| Plagiarism | 0%. [Report](https://github.com/shivpujan12/Srijan-2022/blob/main/articles/plagReports/)|

---

Ubiquitous computing, also known as pervasive computing, refers to the concept of Internet-connected computers so common and embedded in our lives that they are essentially invisible and out of our conscious awareness. It’s not quite there yet, but we’re getting closer every day as more devices come online and we are pushed toward ever-increasing dependence on technology. Ubiquitous computing offers numerous benefits to businesses in terms of efficiency, data access, and cost savings, which I will elaborate on further below.

## What is ubiquitous computing?

The primary benefit for a company is that, in comparison to older technologies, users are more likely to embrace ubiquitous computing if they see it providing them with immediate benefits. For example, when employees can check email while they’re on break or on their way home from work rather than feeling like they have to sit down at a desk and fire up their computers first thing in the morning. Another benefit businesses get from ubiquitous computing is saving money. With fewer hardware purchases needed, companies save money on things like servers and desktop computers. They also spend less time managing these devices because they don’t need as many techs to keep everything running smoothly. In addition, because fewer devices are being used overall, companies save energy costs as well by using less electricity and cutting back on cooling costs associated with large numbers of machines. And finally, ubiquitous computing allows companies to reach out to customers in new ways. This could mean offering 24/7 customer service or even encouraging customers to use your products or services all day long instead of just during business hours.

## Why does ubiquitous computing matter?

A computer is defined as something that computes, stores information, and communicates with other computers. If a computer does one or more of these things, it can be said to be ubiquitous. The term ubiquitous computing was coined by Mark Weiser in 1988 when he predicted that computers would be integrated into everyday life within 10 years. He envisioned that they would become pervasive in people's lives, much like electricity, and therefore hard to separate from work or leisure time. This vision has come true over time; computing has become embedded into many areas including cars, smartphones, and video games to name a few. With all of these technological advances, we have been able to further our society in ways that were not possible before. For example, now some smartphones allow you to pay for your groceries at a store using your phone instead of having cash on hand. In addition, self-driving cars are being tested on roads around the world and may soon be available for public use. These types of innovations will continue as technology becomes increasingly more advanced and companies will try new ways to use it for daily tasks such as shopping online or paying bills through an app on your phone instead of going out in person which saves time and money for consumers who can spend their extra hours doing other activities rather than going out shopping or waiting in line at a bank.

## How will it change the future?

When it comes to ubiquitous computing, I think back to one of my favourite science fiction films, The Minority Report. In it, Tom Cruise plays a police officer who can see into the future and stop crimes before they occur. The future envisioned in that film is probably way off, but we’re already living in a world where our devices can help us get things done faster than ever before. For example, after your alarm goes off you can immediately turn on your light switch and go about your morning routine without even getting out of bed. If you want to take a trip somewhere new or unfamiliar, Google Maps will tell you exactly how to get there thanks to GPS technology. Today's computers are smart, so now might be a good time to make sure yours are too! Quantum computing could allow for exponentially more complex calculations than today's machines, which would mean better search results, quicker encryption, and advanced machine learning capabilities. As powerful as quantum computers are expected to be when they become available commercially, most experts believe their first use cases will likely be targeted at specific industries like healthcare and finance because those fields deal with such massive amounts of data.

## When can we expect ubiquitous computing to arrive?

Ubiquitous computing devices will be embedded in every aspect of our lives, from home appliances to infrastructure. That’s not likely to happen any time soon, though. It will take a while for ubiquitous computing to mature and become more mainstream. Just as it took time for mobile computing and social media to evolve into platforms that millions use each day, ubiquitous computing is only just getting started. With that said, we can expect ubiquitous computing to arrive in full force by 2020. If you’re interested in being an early adopter, start looking at devices like Amazon Echo or Google Home. These products are only going to get better over time, so they could be great investments if you want to start experimenting with ubiquitous computing today.

## Myths about ubiquitous computing

One common misconception is that ubiquitous computing will change how we interact with technology. Ubiquitous computing does not change how we interact with technology, rather it changes where we can interact with it. This means that current trends in human-computer interaction will continue unabated. For example, as more and more devices become connected through wireless networks, there are no signs that users will stop interacting with computers using keyboards and mice. Rather than changing how we interact with computers, ubiquitous computing simply expands our opportunities for interaction to places previously thought impossible or impractical. As an example, consider a scenario in which you are at work and want to check your email on your mobile phone. While it would be possible for you to connect your phone directly to your computer at work, doing so would require that you walk over to your computer (and perhaps sit down) just so you could check your email on a small screen. Instead, you might prefer to use some other method of accessing your email from afar. With ubiquitous computing, however, you could access your email from anywhere—you wouldn’t even need to walk over to your computer! Instead, all you would need to do is send yourself an SMS message containing a link that when clicked would open up your webmail client on your phone.
